# Glossary
Created 2024-09-11, Leon Rauschning

In the msyd documentation and codebase, we use a number of terms specific to msyd, or in a different meaning than in general usage or other genomics contexts.
Through the development of msyd, these terms have evolved somewhat – owing as much to the shifting nature of methods for multi-genomics analyses as to the idiosyncracies small groups like to develop.
This glossary represents an attempt to capture the meaning of the most important terms and the intuition behind them as msyd is nearing release, in the hopes that it will be useful for working with msyd and its output.

- Synteny: Two genomic regions are considered to be in synteny (syntenic to each other) when they are found in the same large-scale genomic context and align to each other. It can be thought of as the absence of structural variation. Synteny forms a backbone along the chromosomes of a species, and enables biological processes like meiotic paring and recombination. Contrary to other tools, SyRI and by extension msyd do not consider genome annotations when finding synteny.
- Structural Variation (SV): Structural variants are large-scale differences in the genomes of a population. Various processes may cause structural variation, including transposon activity, double-strand breaks and non-homologous recombination. SVs may contain small variants like SNPs or indels, or other SVs.
- Multisynteny: A multisyntenic region is a region in the genome that is syntenic between any two individual genomes in a subset of a population. It can be either mera- or coresyntenic. Msyd stores its position in any of the genomes contained in it. One individual genome of this subset is chosen by msyd as the representative of that multisyntenic region, and alignments of this representative to other organisms are (optionally) reported as CIGAR strings. If a multisyntenic region is present in a linear reference given to msyd, it will always be chosen as the representative sample.
- Degree of multisynteny: The number of organisms a multisyntenic region is shared by. It is somewhat analogous to the concept of allele frequency. The degree of a multisyntenic region is always between two and the number of individuals in the population.
- Coresynteny: A multisyntenic region encompassing the entire population. Its degree will always be the number of individuals in the population. Because coresyntenic regions are structurally conserved and occur in every genome, they have a single defined ordering shared by all individuals. This can be thought to represent the syntenic backbone of a population.
- Merasynteny: A merasyntenic region is multisyntenic between a true subset of the sampled population – so its degree is always less than the number of individuals in the population. Merasynteny can be thought of as corresponding to alleles of a structural variant. In contrast to coresyntenic regions, merasyntenic regions do not have a defined position in all genomes of the population, though they are implicitly constrained by the surrounding coresyntenic regions. If prompted, msyd places these regions at the first position allowed by this constraint in the coordinate space of a linear reference.
- Private: Structurally private regions are regions that are not syntenic to any other region in any genome in the population. This does not necessarily mean that they do not exist elsewhere; they may simply be in a different structural context, or too diverged or repetitive to align. In practice, private regions are highly enriched in the centromeres and rDNA arrays.
- msyd/multisynteny detector (pronounced /msi:d/, M-SEE-D): A software for efficiently finding multisynteny in a population of genomes. msyd uses different algorithms to achieve this, most notable the Synteny Intersection Algorithm and Iterative Realignment. The native file format of msyd is the Population Synteny File Format (PSF), though msyd can also export multisynteny calls to VCF. msyd also provides subcommand that can filter PSF files, compute statistics on them or use multisynteny for ordering genomes for plotsr plotting. msyd can also merge small variant calls of different samples in structurally conserved regions.
- Population Synteny File (Format): The native file format used by msyd to store called multisynteny. It loosely retains some BED-like features. PSF can contain CIGAR strings to allow further processing and reading by msyd, or be stored without CIGAR strings for better readability and smaller file sizes.

